Spacing foundation updates (#4620)
jpmorganchase/salt-ds: site/docs/foundations/spacing.mdx

  priority: 2
---

> Spacing refers to the negative area between elements, serving as a measurement tool. While Salt provides a general approach to spacing, it isn’t an exhaustive set of guidelines. Consistent spacing enhances visual appeal and functionality in layouts.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "serving as a measurement tool" means?

Reviewer 2: If the goal is to articulate the value of spacing, I believe it's more than just negative space. After discussing this with an LLM, we arrived at a perspective that more highlights the significance of spacing in a design system.

Holistic View of Space: It's important to consider space as both the negative area and as an integral part of the overall composition. Space interacts with content to create balance, hierarchy, and flow.

Dynamic Nature of Space: In modern design, especially with responsive and fluid layouts, space is dynamic. It adapts based on content, screen size, and user interaction, making it a critical component of design systems.

Role in Visual Hierarchy: Spacing is a powerful tool for establishing visual hierarchy. It can emphasize certain elements while de-emphasizing others, guiding the user's journey through the content.

Consistency and Flexibility: While consistency in spacing is crucial for a cohesive design, flexibility is also important to adapt to different contexts and content needs.

Reviewer 2: it also relates to size and visual consistency through alignment of baselines, gutters etc.

Author: Sure, I've added in some of the suggested content here. We'd like to stray away from turning foundations into design principles similar to what was in UITK and keep the text to a minimum where possible.

> For specific component spacing details, please refer to the respective [component page](/salt/components/index).

Reviewer: AFAIK we don't call out spacing on component pages?

| `--salt-spacing-500` | 5.00x   | 20                | 40                  | 60               | 80                 |
| `--salt-spacing-550` | 5.50x   | 22                | 44                  | 66               | 88                 |
| `--salt-spacing-600` | 6.00x   | 24                | 48                  | 72               | 96                 |
| `--salt-spacing-650` | 6.50x   | 26                | 52                  | 78               | 104                |
| `--salt-spacing-700` | 7.00x   | 28                | 56                  | 84               | 112                |
| `--salt-spacing-750` | 7.50x   | 30                | 60                  | 90               | 120                |
| `--salt-spacing-800` | 8.00x   | 32                | 64                  | 96               | 128                |
| `--salt-spacing-850` | 8.50x   | 34                | 68                  | 102              | 136                |
| `--salt-spacing-900` | 9.00x   | 36                | 72                  | 108              | 144                |
| `--salt-spacing-950` | 9.50x   | 38                | 76                  | 114              | 152                |

> \*These values are listed in pixels (px).

Reviewer 2: We added x to the multiplier, why not make things obvious and add px to values or add (px) to the headers..
This annotation does not work that well?

Author: Thanks for pointing this out, Shadow page has (px) in the Header so will keep consistency here, too.

## Hierarchical spacing

It's important to use varied spacing between elements to establish a visual hierarchy. The vertical separation of items such as headings, blocks of text, form elements and cards should follow a consistent pattern to create visual rhythm.

> Horizontal dividers are used to divide regions of a layout and should be spaced consistently with salt-spacing-300 above and below sections. For more information on dividers, please refer to the [divider component page](/salt/components/divider).

Reviewer 2: Should all variables be in back ticks `salt-spacing-300` ?

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/spacing-divider.png"
  alt="Side by side example of hierarchical spacing with and without a divider."
/>

> ### Header spacing

Reviewer 2: have a look at the TOC, you have grouped everything under Hierachical spacing, is that correct ?

Author: Thanks for pointing this out, I didn't realize

| `--salt-spacing-300` | 3.00x   | 12                | 24                  | 36               | 48                 |
| `--salt-spacing-350` | 3.50x   | 14                | 28                  | 42               | 56                 |
| `--salt-spacing-400` | 4.00x   | 16                | 32                  | 48               | 64                 |

> | `--salt-spacing-450` | 4.50x   | 18                | 36                  | 54               | 72                 |

Reviewer: These aren't currently in the system.

We should either remove them temporarily or hold off merging this PR until they are added.

Reviewer: Hopefully :)

| `--salt-spacing-800` | 8.00x   | 32                | 64                  | 96               | 128                |
| `--salt-spacing-850` | 8.50x   | 34                | 68                  | 102              | 136                |
| `--salt-spacing-900` | 9.00x   | 36                | 72                  | 108              | 144                |
| `--salt-spacing-950` | 9.50x   | 38                | 76                  | 114              | 152                |

\*These values are listed in pixels (px).

## Hierarchical spacing

Spacing tends to consist of a parent space and one or more subspaces. The vertical separation of items such as headings, blocks of text, form elements and cards should follow a consistent pattern to create visual rhythm.

Horizontal dividers are used to divide regions of a layout and should be spaced consistently with salt-spacing-300 above and below sections. For more information on dividers, please refer to the divider component page.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/spacing-divider.png"
  alt="Side by side example of hierarchical spacing with and without a divider."
/>

### Header spacing

> Headings serve as the primary title of a content type by providing visual separation and hierarchy. All headings should be accompanied by standard spacing above and below. The spacing placed directly below a heading depends on the level of focus placed on the item.

Reviewer: The first sentence may need updating? "Heading serve as the primary title of a content type" not sure what "content type" means here

Author: Good point, will adjust

| H3      | `--salt-spacing-200` | `--salt-spacing-100` |
| H4      | `--salt-spacing-200` | None                 |

### Container spacing

> A container represents an enclosed area with information, this is typically anything that is in a div in code. Spacing in containers varies depending on the container size.

Reviewer 2: div should be `div` then you could remove the "in code" as anything in backticks is inline code.

| H3      | `--salt-spacing-200` | `--salt-spacing-100` |
| H4      | `--salt-spacing-200` | None                 |

### Container spacing

A container represents an enclosed area with information, this is typically anything that is in a div in code. Spacing in containers varies depending on the container size.

Please refer to the [header block pattern page](/salt/patterns/header-block) to learn more about container spacing in context.

| Container size | Padding size         |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| Large          | `--salt-spacing-300` |
| Medium         | `--salt-spacing-200` |

> | Small          | `--salt-spacing-200` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Small          | `--salt-spacing-100` |
```
?

### Horizontal spacing

> Standard spacing between items in a horizontal configuration is typically 300, which aligns with the design systems responsive layout grid, and will automatically adjust depending on what density you're using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard spacing between items in a horizontal configuration is typically `--salt-spacing-300`. This aligns with the design system's responsive layout grid and will automatically adjust depending on the density you're using.
```
